---
layout: post
title: An Image Gallery of Chongqing, China
date: 2024-12-15 21:01:00
description: This is about my visit to Chongqing for APSEC 2024 conference.
tags: images
categories: conference
thumbnail: assets/img/apsec_2024/9.jpeg
---

31<sup>st</sup> Asia-Pacific Software Engineering Conference held in **Chongqing, China**. Here are some pictures I captured around the city of Chongqing and the conference.

---

**Hongya Dong**

is a an 11-story stilt-building complex in the main commercial district of Jiefangbei in the city of Chongqing, China. It comprises a series of structures built into the hillside along the southern bank of the Jialing River, and is one of the most popular tourist attractions in the city. Across the Jialing River opposite to the Hongya Dong gives better view of the complex along with the Twin bridge over the river.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/4.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/5.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/6.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/7.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/8.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/9.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/10.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/11.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/12.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

---

**Liziba Station**

is a monorail station on Line 2 of Chongqing Rail Transit where the station is located on the 19th floor of a residential building which was built along with the station in 2005 where the train goes through the building.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/21.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/22.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/23.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

---

**Kuixinglou Square**

is a public square which looks normal ground floor until you take the look one edge of the square which shows that you are in 22nd floor while the opposite edge has public roads on the same floor and it is considered ground floor. Chongqing is a mountainous terrain cyberpunk city.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/24.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/25.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/26.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

---

**Liberation Monument**

in Chongqing is the War Victory Monument and People's Liberation Monument. It is located in the heart of the central business district of Jiefangbei in Yuzhong District, Chongqing. The Jiefangbei clock tower on the monument is one of Chongqing's most iconic locations. The tower was built in remembrance of China's victory in the Sino-Japanese war. An interesting fact, at about 28 meters tall, only a few decades ago, the liberation monument was one of the tallest buildings in all of Chongqing. The monument is located in the middle of what is the modern-day pedestrian street and the 4 main roads converge at the monument.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/27.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/28.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/29.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>

---

**Ronghui Hot Springs**

is where the Asia-Pacific Software Engineering Conference (2024) took place. It is vibrant, friendly and remote location in Chongqing.

<div class="row mt-3">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/31.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/32.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/33.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
        <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/34.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
        <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.liquid path="assets/img/apsec_2024/35.jpeg" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" zoomable=true %}
    </div>
</div>
